
Perl::LanguageServer - Language Server and Debug Protocol Adapter for Perl

This is a Language Server and Debug Protocol Adapter for Perl

It implements the Language Server Protocol which provides
syntax-checking, symbol search, etc. Perl to various editors, for
example Visual Stuido Code or Atom.

https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specification

It also implements the Debug Adapter Protocol, which allow debugging
with various editors/includes

https://microsoft.github.io/debug-adapter-protocol/overview

To use both with Visual Studio Code, install the extention "perl"

https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=richterger.perl

Any comments and patches are welcome.

FEATURES

* Language Server

  * Syntax checking
  * Symbols in file
  * Symbols in workspace/directory
  * Goto Definition
  * Find References
  * Supports multiple workspace folders
  * Run on remote system via ssh

* Debugger

  * Run, pause, step, next, return
  * Support for coro threads
  * Breakpoints 
  * Conditional breakpoints
  * Breakpoints can be set while programm runs and for modules not yet loaded
  * Variable view, can switch to every stack frame or coro thread
  * Set variable
  * Watch variable
  * Tooltips with variable values
  * Evaluate perl code in debuggee, in context of every stack frame of coro thread
  * Automatically reload changed Perl modules while debugging
  * Debug mutiple perl programm at once
  * Run on remote system via ssh

INSTALLATION

To install this module, run the following commands:

	perl Makefile.PL
	make
	make test
	make install

NOTE: Only tested with Perl 5.18 and newer. So in case you want to use
is with older versions of Perl slight modifications might be necessary.

To use it with Visual Studio Code, install the extention "perl"


SUPPORT AND DOCUMENTATION

After installing, you can find documentation for this module with the
perldoc command.

    perldoc Perl::LanguageServer

Presentation on German Perl Workshop 2020:

    https://github.com/richterger/Perl-LanguageServer/blob/master/docs/Perl-LanguageServer%20und%20Debugger%20f%C3%BCr%20Visual%20Studio%20Code%20u.a.%20Editoren%20-%20Perl%20Workshop%202020.pdf

You can also look for information at:

    Github:
        https://github.com/richterger/Perl-LanguageServer

    RT, CPAN's request tracker (report bugs here)
        http://rt.cpan.org/NoAuth/Bugs.html?Dist=Perl-LanguageServer

    AnnoCPAN, Annotated CPAN documentation
        http://annocpan.org/dist/Perl-LanguageServer

    CPAN Ratings
        http://cpanratings.perl.org/d/Perl-LanguageServer

    MetaCPAN
        https://metacpan.org/release/Perl-LanguageServer


LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2018-2020 grichter

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the the Artistic License (2.0). You may obtain a
copy of the full license at:

L<http://www.perlfoundation.org/artistic_license_2_0>

Any use, modification, and distribution of the Standard or Modified
Versions is governed by this Artistic License. By using, modifying or
distributing the Package, you accept this license. Do not use, modify,
or distribute the Package, if you do not accept this license.

If your Modified Version has been derived from a Modified Version made
by someone other than you, you are nevertheless required to ensure that
your Modified Version complies with the requirements of this license.

This license does not grant you the right to use any trademark, service
mark, tradename, or logo of the Copyright Holder.

This license includes the non-exclusive, worldwide, free-of-charge
patent license to make, have made, use, offer to sell, sell, import and
otherwise transfer the Package with respect to any patent claims
licensable by the Copyright Holder that are necessarily infringed by the
Package. If you institute patent litigation (including a cross-claim or
counterclaim) against any party alleging that the Package constitutes
direct or contributory patent infringement, then this Artistic License
to you shall terminate on the date that such litigation is filed.

Disclaimer of Warranty: THE PACKAGE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER
AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES.
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE, OR NON-INFRINGEMENT ARE DISCLAIMED TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY
YOUR LOCAL LAW. UNLESS REQUIRED BY LAW, NO COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR
CONTRIBUTOR WILL BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, OR
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THE PACKAGE,
EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

